---
layout: page
title: Left-Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex (DLPFC) - Subgenual anterior Cingulate Cortex (SgACC)
description: Treatment resistant depression brain target for Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)  
img: assets/img/DLPFC-SGC.png
importance: 1
category: Research
related_publications: hadas_right_2021,hadar_answering_2017,hadas_exposure_2016,hadas_attentional_impairments_2016
toc: true
---

# Neurophysiological Biomarkers for Neuromodulation in Treatment-Resistant Depression
As a neuroscientist passionate about advancing diagnostics and therapeutics for depression, I have dedicated much of my career to uncovering circuit-specific biomarkers using transcranial magnetic stimulation combined with electroencephalography (TMS-EEG). This work aligns with my broader research interests in identifying mechanistic neurophysiological markers for treatment-resistant depression (TRD) and designing targeted neuromodulation interventions to improve clinical outcomes. Drawing from my postdoctoral experiences at the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) and UC San Diego, I led studies that validated subgenual cingulate cortex (SGC) hyperactivity and connectivity as key features of TRD pathophysiology, while also exploring hippocampal (Hipp) activation in relation to treatment side effects. These efforts not only elucidate depression's neural underpinnings but also pave the way for personalized treatments, such as repetitive TMS (rTMS) and magnetic seizure therapy (MST), which I aim to further develop in future projects at institutions like UC Irvine's Noel Drury, M.D. Institute for Translational Depression Discoveries.
In a pivotal study, I examined SGC hyperactivity and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC)-SGC effective connectivity in patients with major depressive disorder (MDD) before and after high-frequency rTMS treatment [Hadas et al., 2019]. Using TMS-EEG, we quantified SGC activity via significant current density (SCD) and effective connectivity via significant current scattering (SCS). At baseline, patients with MDD showed elevated SCD and SCS in the SGC compared to healthy controls, with SCD classifying MDD with 77% accuracy. Post-treatment, active rTMS attenuated these measures toward control levels, while sham rTMS did not. Notably, baseline SGC SCD correlated with depression severity (measured by the 17-item Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression, HRSD-17; ρ = 0.41, P = .03), and SCS changes correlated with symptom improvement in the active group (ρ = 0.58, P = .047). This work was the first to demonstrate TMS-EEG's utility in capturing causal connectivity changes, supporting SGC-DLPFC dysregulation as a therapeutic target.
Failed to load imageView link, significant current density (SCD), and significant current scattering (SCS) over time post-TMS pulse. Panel A shows higher measures in MDD patients vs. healthy controls at key latencies (e.g., 30 ms, 100 ms, 200 ms). Panel B shows attenuation in active rTMS group vs. sham. Shaded areas represent ±1 SEM, with asterisks indicating P < .05.)
Figure 2. Current density (J), significant current density (SCD), and significant current scattering (SCS) after single transcranial magnetic stimulation. A, Participants with major depressive disorder (MDD) compared with healthy controls. B, Participants in active groups compared with participants in sham group. Shaded areas represent ±1 SEM. a P < .05. Adapted from Hadas et al. (2019).
Building on this, I investigated similar biomarkers in TRD patients undergoing MST, a promising alternative to electroconvulsive therapy with fewer cognitive side effects [Hadas et al., 2020]. TMS-EEG revealed reduced DLPFC-SGC SCS post-MST (P < .036), correlating with HRSD-24 improvements (ρ = 0.46, P < .031). Additionally, Hipp SCD decreased post-treatment (P < .015), and this change correlated with Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) score shifts (ρ = -0.59, P < .026), providing the first direct evidence linking hippocampal activation to cognitive outcomes in seizure therapies. These findings dissociate efficacy (SGC-DLPFC connectivity) from side effects (Hipp activation), highlighting TMS-EEG's potential for monitoring treatment responses without invasive imaging.
Failed to load imageView link
Figure 1. SCS between the DLPFC and the SGC. a Pre-MST vs. post-MST trial SCS dynamics, greyed area means are illustrated as inset violin plots. b SGC SCS pre-post change correlated with HRSD-24 pre-post change. Time-course shades represent ± SEM. Adapted from Hadas et al. (2020).
These studies, which I conceptualized, analyzed, and led as first author, underscore my expertise in multimodal biomarker development—integrating TMS-EEG with behavioral and imaging data. They directly inform my future plans, such as personalizing accelerated intermittent theta-burst stimulation (aiTBS) protocols using TMS-EEG for coil positioning and frequency optimization, as outlined in my research statement. By leveraging cost-efficient, circuit-specific markers like those identified here, I aim to enhance TRD interventions, ultimately improving patient prospects through translational science. This portfolio project exemplifies my commitment to bridging academia and industry, from clinical trials to startup consultations like Deliberate.ai, where I apply similar pipelines for mental health diagnostics.